We're going to go back to considering the
rotational part of this matrix derivative.
We're going to rearrange its expression and
isolate the skew-symmetric matrix. That means
we have to take the rotation matrix over to
the other side of the equation. We need to
compute its inverse but we know for a rotation
metrics that the inverse is the same as its transpose.
So now we have the skew-symmetric matrix in
terms of the derivative of the rotation matrix
with respect to Q1 and that's the approximation
that we've got highlighted here in red. The
rotation matrix transpose and the rate of
change of the robot's joint angle. We can
compute this numerically and we end up with this matrix which should be a skew-symmetric matrix.
Let's have a look at it in a bit more detail.
We know that a skew-symmetric matrix has got
a form something like this so let's check
whether this is a skew-symmetric matrix and
if it is, what are the values of the angular
velocity?
At the start if we look at the diagonals we
can see that they are either zero or very,
very close to zero and remember that this
is an approximation so I'm going to say hand
on heart that these are zeroes on the diagonal.
It's looking like a skew-symmetric matrix
to me. Let's look at the elements that correspond
to Omega X. In this case they're both zero
so we can write that Omega X is approximately
equal to zero times Q1dot. Let's look at the
Omega Y elements and they are both identically
equal to zero so I'm happy to say that Omega
Y is approximately equal to zero times Q1dot.
Let's look now at Omega Z and this is pretty
consistent with Omega Z being approximately
equal to 1 times Q1dot. So what we've done
is match the elements in an exact skew-symmetric
matrix and are approximate skew-symmetric
matrix and written some relationships between
the components of the robot end-effector angular
velocity and the rate of change of the first
joint angle that's Q1dot.
So I can write it now in matrix form like
this, and here's that expression again and
to bring back the expression we computed earlier
for the transitional velocity of the robot's
end-effector. And I can combine these two
by stacking up the two vectors and bringing
out the common term Q1dot.
And I now have this relationship between the
spatial velocity of the robot's end-effector
and the velocity of the robot's first joint
angle. So here's the expression that we just
computed and we can do the same thing for
joint 2 and joint 3 all the way up to joint 6.
You'll notice that the numbers in the vectors
at the top and the columns of the matrix are
slightly different and that's because the
vectors at the top are an approximation to
the true derivative while the columns with
the matrix are the true derivative. Here's
the matrix again and it relates the spatial
velocity to the robot's joint velocity by
this matrix in the middle which is another
instance of a Jacobian matrix. It's a 6 x 6
matrix and it’s referred to as the manipulator
Jacobian matrix. We can write this expression
much more succinctly.
We use the Greek letter ‘nu’ as we have done
previously to represent spatial velocity and
we represent joint velocity by Qdot. I've
used capital J to represent the manipulator
Jacobian and I've indicated that it is a function
of Q. The elements of the Jacobian matrix
depend on the joint angles.
Now we're going to compute the exact Jacobian
for the Puma 560 robot and I've already loaded
a model of the robot into my workspace. I'm
going to put the Jacobian into the workspace
for variable J and my robot object is called
P560 and the method that I'm going to invoke
is called Jacobian and the only argument that
I've passed in is the set of joint angles.
And here is the Jacobian matrix and that's
being computed for the set of joint angles
QN and this is what it looks like in radians
and this is a robot configuration a set of
robot joint angles that puts the robot’s end-effector
somewhere in the middle of its useful workspace.
A useful way to think about the Jacobian matrix
is in terms of what the individual columns
mean. The first column of the Jacobian matrix
multiplied by the rate of change of the first
joint gives me a contribution to the end-effector’s
spatial velocity.
And this column gives me a component of end-effector
velocity due to Q2. This is the component
due to Q3, Q4, Q5 and Q6. And we add the components
due to each of these joints to get the sum
total end-effector spatial velocity.